https://scielo.conicyt.cl/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=S0717-75262004000600015
Cartas

REV CHIL OBSTET GINECOL 2004; 69(6): 486 

 

Cartas    Dear Colleague:  The School of Nursing and Midwifery, Trinity    College Dublin and the UK Cochrane Centre are seeking participation from    individuals who have expertise in the area of evaluations of maternity    care who will take part in a new electronic Delphi study to identify a    minimum set of outcome measures for evaluating models of maternity care.    Participation is easy, requiring you to "click" on various options    in on-line questionnaires.  This study arose from a systematic review    of the literature, which identified differences in outcome measures chosen    in reporting evaluations of models of maternity care. The review highlighted    the need for consensus on a clinical minimum data set to be used in the    evaluation of models of maternity care. For the purpose of this study,    a clinical minimum dataset is defined as a standardised, small number    of clinical indicators, which collectively attempt to summarise the effectiveness    of a model of care.  Participants in the study all have expertise    in the evaluation of maternity care and will reflect the opinions of the    following broad groups: women as maternity service users, midwives, obstetricians,    paediatricians/neonatologists, policy-makers and service providers and    researchers with expertise in maternity care research.  Your participation in this study is important        and we very much hope you will choose to participate. All participants will        be acknowledged in the final study report and will be forwarded with a copy        of the final report.  If you would like to be part of this process    please reply to this email with your name as soon as possible.  In addition, we would appreciate your help    in identifying others with expertise in evaluations of maternity care.    If you know of others who have this expertise, please forward this message    to them also. Everybody with an interest and expertise in this area is    welcome to participate.  The time-line for this project is short    and we therefore look forward to hearing from you as soon as possible.  Yours sincerely,  Declan Devane, Lecturer in Midwifery, School    of Nursing and Midwifery, Trinity College Dublin.     Cecily Begley, Director and Chair      of Nursing & Midwifery, School of Nursing and Midwifery, Trinity College      Dublin.     Colm OBoyle, Lecturer in Midwifery,      School of Nursing and Midwifery, Trinity College Dublin.     Mike Clarke, Director and Professor      of Clinical Epidemiology, UK Cochrane Centre, Oxford.  

 

Dear Colleague:  The School of Nursing and Midwifery, Trinity    College Dublin and the UK Cochrane Centre are seeking participation from    individuals who have expertise in the area of evaluations of maternity    care who will take part in a new electronic Delphi study to identify a    minimum set of outcome measures for evaluating models of maternity care.    Participation is easy, requiring you to "click" on various options    in on-line questionnaires.  This study arose from a systematic review    of the literature, which identified differences in outcome measures chosen    in reporting evaluations of models of maternity care. The review highlighted    the need for consensus on a clinical minimum data set to be used in the    evaluation of models of maternity care. For the purpose of this study,    a clinical minimum dataset is defined as a standardised, small number    of clinical indicators, which collectively attempt to summarise the effectiveness    of a model of care.  Participants in the study all have expertise    in the evaluation of maternity care and will reflect the opinions of the    following broad groups: women as maternity service users, midwives, obstetricians,    paediatricians/neonatologists, policy-makers and service providers and    researchers with expertise in maternity care research.  Your participation in this study is important        and we very much hope you will choose to participate. All participants will        be acknowledged in the final study report and will be forwarded with a copy        of the final report.  If you would like to be part of this process    please reply to this email with your name as soon as possible.  In addition, we would appreciate your help    in identifying others with expertise in evaluations of maternity care.    If you know of others who have this expertise, please forward this message    to them also. Everybody with an interest and expertise in this area is    welcome to participate.  The time-line for this project is short    and we therefore look forward to hearing from you as soon as possible.  Yours sincerely,  Declan Devane, Lecturer in Midwifery, School    of Nursing and Midwifery, Trinity College Dublin.     Cecily Begley, Director and Chair      of Nursing & Midwifery, School of Nursing and Midwifery, Trinity College      Dublin.     Colm OBoyle, Lecturer in Midwifery,      School of Nursing and Midwifery, Trinity College Dublin.     Mike Clarke, Director and Professor      of Clinical Epidemiology, UK Cochrane Centre, Oxford.  

The School of Nursing and Midwifery, Trinity    College Dublin and the UK Cochrane Centre are seeking participation from    individuals who have expertise in the area of evaluations of maternity    care who will take part in a new electronic Delphi study to identify a    minimum set of outcome measures for evaluating models of maternity care.    Participation is easy, requiring you to "click" on various options    in on-line questionnaires. 

This study arose from a systematic review    of the literature, which identified differences in outcome measures chosen    in reporting evaluations of models of maternity care. The review highlighted    the need for consensus on a clinical minimum data set to be used in the    evaluation of models of maternity care. For the purpose of this study,    a clinical minimum dataset is defined as a standardised, small number    of clinical indicators, which collectively attempt to summarise the effectiveness    of a model of care. 

Participants in the study all have expertise    in the evaluation of maternity care and will reflect the opinions of the    following broad groups: women as maternity service users, midwives, obstetricians,    paediatricians/neonatologists, policy-makers and service providers and    researchers with expertise in maternity care research. 

If you would like to be part of this process    please reply to this email with your name as soon as possible. 

In addition, we would appreciate your help    in identifying others with expertise in evaluations of maternity care.    If you know of others who have this expertise, please forward this message    to them also. Everybody with an interest and expertise in this area is    welcome to participate. 

The time-line for this project is short    and we therefore look forward to hearing from you as soon as possible. 

Yours sincerely, 

Declan Devane, Lecturer in Midwifery, School    of Nursing and Midwifery, Trinity College Dublin.     Cecily Begley, Director and Chair      of Nursing & Midwifery, School of Nursing and Midwifery, Trinity College      Dublin.     Colm OBoyle, Lecturer in Midwifery,      School of Nursing and Midwifery, Trinity College Dublin.     Mike Clarke, Director and Professor      of Clinical Epidemiology, UK Cochrane Centre, Oxford. 