https://scielo.conicyt.cl/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=S0717-75262004000400015
CARTAS AL EDITOR

REV CHIL OBSTET GINECOL 2004;  69(4): 339 

  

CARTAS AL EDITOR    4 de noviembre de 2004  Dear Colleague,  It is with great excitement that I invite    you to take part in the growing online community of practitioners who    have made ObGynWorld.com their essential resource in obstetrics and gynecology.    With your free registration to ObGynWorld.com -the official, FIGO-endorsed    website- you will gain access to some of the best resources that the Internet    has to offer: an opportunity for enhancement of knowledge, convenient    access to continually updated information, conference reports, guidelines,    databases, and much more.  In addition, your free registration will    automatically earn you 50 MedPoints. The ObGynWorld's points program allows    physicians to collect MedPoints as they participate in online activities.    Medpoints can then be redeemed towards various activities such as registration    to medical congresses all over the world.  To learn more about ObGynWorld.com and    Medpoints, join me on a 60-second tour of the site that illustrates how    to easily navigate through the site and reveals all the resources in the    field of women's health care ObGynWorld.com has to offer.  Sincerely,   Dr. Luis Cabero Roura   Vice-President, FIGO   Editor-in-chief, ObGynWorld.com    8 de noviembre de 2004  Dr Enrique Oyarzún E.     Presidente Sociedad Chilena de     Obstetricia y Ginecología.     PRESENTE.  Estimado Sr Presidente:  Deseo comunicar una iniciativa, donde yo    tengo un pequeño grado de participación, como editor médico    que puede ser de interés para los socios de la Sociedad Chilena    de Obstetricia y Ginecología. Se trata del Proyecto INFO de la    Universidad Johns Hopkins y Bibliomed que proporciona información    sobre salud reproductiva y planificación familiar. Es una revista    electrónica, el "Pop Reporter en Español" con    enlaces a artículos de investigación, noticias, informes    y acontecimientos clave en todo el mundo. El primer ejemplar acaba de    aparecer. La subscripción no tiene costo. El enlace electrónico    es:  www.bibliomed.com/reproductiva  Un gran saludo y gracias por su atención,   Juan E. Vargas, M.D.   Adjunct Assistant Professor   Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology,   and Reproductive Sciences, and Radiology,      UCSF   Chief of Obstetrics, San Francisco General      Hospital   1001 Potrero Avenue, Ward 6D.   San Francisco, CA 94110   Tel: 415-206-3774   Fax: 415-206-3112   Email: vargasj@obgyn.ucsf.edu  

  

4 de noviembre de 2004  Dear Colleague,  It is with great excitement that I invite    you to take part in the growing online community of practitioners who    have made ObGynWorld.com their essential resource in obstetrics and gynecology.    With your free registration to ObGynWorld.com -the official, FIGO-endorsed    website- you will gain access to some of the best resources that the Internet    has to offer: an opportunity for enhancement of knowledge, convenient    access to continually updated information, conference reports, guidelines,    databases, and much more.  In addition, your free registration will    automatically earn you 50 MedPoints. The ObGynWorld's points program allows    physicians to collect MedPoints as they participate in online activities.    Medpoints can then be redeemed towards various activities such as registration    to medical congresses all over the world.  To learn more about ObGynWorld.com and    Medpoints, join me on a 60-second tour of the site that illustrates how    to easily navigate through the site and reveals all the resources in the    field of women's health care ObGynWorld.com has to offer.  Sincerely,   Dr. Luis Cabero Roura   Vice-President, FIGO   Editor-in-chief, ObGynWorld.com    8 de noviembre de 2004  Dr Enrique Oyarzún E.     Presidente Sociedad Chilena de     Obstetricia y Ginecología.     PRESENTE.  Estimado Sr Presidente:  Deseo comunicar una iniciativa, donde yo    tengo un pequeño grado de participación, como editor médico    que puede ser de interés para los socios de la Sociedad Chilena    de Obstetricia y Ginecología. Se trata del Proyecto INFO de la    Universidad Johns Hopkins y Bibliomed que proporciona información    sobre salud reproductiva y planificación familiar. Es una revista    electrónica, el "Pop Reporter en Español" con    enlaces a artículos de investigación, noticias, informes    y acontecimientos clave en todo el mundo. El primer ejemplar acaba de    aparecer. La subscripción no tiene costo. El enlace electrónico    es:  www.bibliomed.com/reproductiva  Un gran saludo y gracias por su atención,   Juan E. Vargas, M.D.   Adjunct Assistant Professor   Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology,   and Reproductive Sciences, and Radiology,      UCSF   Chief of Obstetrics, San Francisco General      Hospital   1001 Potrero Avenue, Ward 6D.   San Francisco, CA 94110   Tel: 415-206-3774   Fax: 415-206-3112   Email: vargasj@obgyn.ucsf.edu  

Dear Colleague, 

It is with great excitement that I invite    you to take part in the growing online community of practitioners who    have made ObGynWorld.com their essential resource in obstetrics and gynecology.    With your free registration to ObGynWorld.com -the official, FIGO-endorsed    website- you will gain access to some of the best resources that the Internet    has to offer: an opportunity for enhancement of knowledge, convenient    access to continually updated information, conference reports, guidelines,    databases, and much more. 

In addition, your free registration will    automatically earn you 50 MedPoints. The ObGynWorld's points program allows    physicians to collect MedPoints as they participate in online activities.    Medpoints can then be redeemed towards various activities such as registration    to medical congresses all over the world. 

To learn more about ObGynWorld.com and    Medpoints, join me on a 60-second tour of the site that illustrates how    to easily navigate through the site and reveals all the resources in the    field of women's health care ObGynWorld.com has to offer. 

Sincerely, 

 Dr. Luis Cabero Roura   Vice-President, FIGO   Editor-in-chief, ObGynWorld.com 

 

8 de noviembre de 2004 

Dr Enrique Oyarzún E.     Presidente Sociedad Chilena de     Obstetricia y Ginecología.     PRESENTE. 

Estimado Sr Presidente: 

Deseo comunicar una iniciativa, donde yo    tengo un pequeño grado de participación, como editor médico    que puede ser de interés para los socios de la Sociedad Chilena    de Obstetricia y Ginecología. Se trata del Proyecto INFO de la    Universidad Johns Hopkins y Bibliomed que proporciona información    sobre salud reproductiva y planificación familiar. Es una revista    electrónica, el "Pop Reporter en Español" con    enlaces a artículos de investigación, noticias, informes    y acontecimientos clave en todo el mundo. El primer ejemplar acaba de    aparecer. La subscripción no tiene costo. El enlace electrónico    es: 

www.bibliomed.com/reproductiva 

Un gran saludo y gracias por su atención, 

 Juan E. Vargas, M.D.   Adjunct Assistant Professor   Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology,   and Reproductive Sciences, and Radiology,      UCSF   Chief of Obstetrics, San Francisco General      Hospital   1001 Potrero Avenue, Ward 6D.   San Francisco, CA 94110   Tel: 415-206-3774   Fax: 415-206-3112   Email: vargasj@obgyn.ucsf.edu 