https://scielo.conicyt.cl/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=S0717-75262005000200015
FIGO 2006 INTERNATIONAL FELLOWSHIP PROGRAMME

REV CHIL OBSTET GINECOL 2005; 70(2): 133-135

Crónica

FIGO 2006 INTERNATIONAL FELLOWSHIP PROGRAMME 

 

The fellows will make scientific presentations    at the Congress. 

The objectives of the programme are: 

   - To demonstrate the real possibility        of reducing maternal mortality significantly in developing countries        by the systematic application of simple methods    - To establish and promote contact between        obstetricians and gynaecologists worldwide.    - To promote cultural and professional        exchange between Malaysia and practitioners from developing countries.    -  To discuss women's health issues        and women's status in Malaysia and in the developing countries.     -  To offer an opportunity to young        obstetricians and gynaecologists to present scientific papers to an        international audience.     - To raise the awareness on developing        countries' needs and challenges.    -  To promote the exchange of academics        between Malaysia and developing countries.    - To enhance the quality of professional        services.    -  To promote collaboration in        scientific research.    Eligibility Applicants must:    - Be practising in a developing country   - Be between 30 and 40 years old    - Be able to communicate fluently in        English    - Hold a postgraduate degree in Ob/Gyn     - Be specialists and not trainees     - Have been in practice for three years        or more    -  Spend 50% of their working time in        a medical school, teaching hospital, or government agency    - Be able to present an oral communication        or poster at the XVIII FIGO World Congress, if their submission is        accepted.    Fellowship The Fellowship will cover:    - Economy round-trip air travel from        the applicant's country to Malaysia and return, and travel within        Malaysia.    - Accommodation for the duration of        their stay in Malaysia    - A placement at a medical school or        hospital within Malaysia    - Registration fee for the XVIII FIGO        World Congress in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.    Certification Certificates will be issued on completion    of the Fellowship.  Application Form & Supporting Documentation  An application Form is enclosed.  Applications will only be considered if    the following documentation is enclosed with the completed application    from:    1. A letter of recommendation in English        from the chair of their department or government/project director    2. A written statement in English on        the potential benefits to the applicant of this Fellowship    3. Curriculum vitae with details of current        employment    4. Photocopies of passport, medical degree,        and postgraduate degree    5. Abstract of a free communication or        poster for presentation at the XVIII FIGO World Congress with the        subject related to obstetrics and gynaecology. This will be considered        for presentation by the Congress 2006 Scientific Programme Committee.    Deadline for submission of Applications  The application and supporting documents    must be received by 30th September 2005. Applications    received after this date will not be considered.  Selection of Fellows The selection of fellows will take place    on or after 31st October 2005. Award recipients will be notified    in two months (i.e. by 31st December 2005).  Enquiries: E-mail: ogsm@po.jaring.my  Postal address:  Obstetrical & Gynaecological Society    of Malaysia     Suite C-07-02, Plaza Mont'Kiara     Nº 2, Jalan Kiara, Mont'Kiaea     50480 Kuala Lumpur     Malaysia  



-

-

Eligibility

Applicants must: 

-

-

Fellowship

The Fellowship will cover: 

Certification

Certificates will be issued on completion    of the Fellowship. 

An application Form is enclosed. 

Applications will only be considered if    the following documentation is enclosed with the completed application    from: 

Deadline for submission of Applications 

The application and supporting documents    must be received by 30th September 2005. Applications    received after this date will not be considered. 

Selection of Fellows

The selection of fellows will take place    on or after 31st October 2005. Award recipients will be notified    in two months (i.e. by 31st December 2005). 

Enquiries:

E-mail: ogsm@po.jaring.my 

Postal address: 

Obstetrical & Gynaecological Society    of Malaysia     Suite C-07-02, Plaza Mont'Kiara     Nº 2, Jalan Kiara, Mont'Kiaea     50480 Kuala Lumpur     Malaysia 
