https://scielo.conicyt.cl/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=S0717-75262007000400014
Crónica

REV CHIL OBSTET GINECOL 2007; 72(4): 275-279

Crónica

 

ACTA DE LA COMISIÓN DE PREMIOS AÑO 2006

  En Santiago de Chile, con fecha 28 de Junio    de 2007, a las 12:30 horas, se reúne la Comisión de Premios formada de    acuerdo a los artículos 26, 27 y 29 de los Estatutos de la Sociedad Chilena    de Obstetricia y Ginecología. El Jurado constituido por el Presidente    de la Sociedad Dr. Eghon Guzman Bustamante, por los Miembros de la Comisión    Drs. Enrique Oyarzún E. y Patricio Gayan B., y por el Secretario General    Dr. Luis Martínez M., éste último con derecho a voz solamente; acuerda    otorgar los siguientes premios correspondientes al año 2006. Premio "DR. JORGE DÍAZ BRAVO"    2006, al mejor trabajo de ingreso: "Cardiopatías congénitas con      diagnóstico prenatal: Seguimiento", de los Drs. Susana Aguilera        R, Juan Guillermo Rodríguez A., Gabriela Enríquez G., Ximena Vascope M.,        Osear Pizarro R., Ramón Almuna V. Centro de Referencia Perinatal Oriente,    Servicio de Obstetricia y Ginecología, Hospital Santiago Oriente, Centro    Cardiovascular, Hospital Luis Calvo Mackenna, Servicio de Neonatología    Hospital Santiago Oriente, "Dr Luis Tisné Brousse". Mención Honrosa del Premio "DR. JORGE    DÍAZ BRAVO" 2006, al trabajo: "Tumores anexiales en niñas      y adolescentes: Experiencia del Hospital Clínico de la Universidad Católica      de Chile, 1991-2003", de los Drs. Carolina Schulin-Zeuthen        R, Prancisca de Jourdan H., Paulina Merino O., Alejandra Etchegaray A.,        Cristian Pomés C Adriana Castiblanco G., Mauricio Cuello F. Departamento    de Obstetricia y Ginecología, Facultad de Medicina, Pontificia Universidad    Católica de Chile. Premio "DR. JUAN MALFANTI" 2006,    al mejor trabajo de casuística: "Síndrome antifosfolípidos y trombocitopenia      materna en gemelar bicoriónico con restricción fetal grave", de    los Drs. Jorge Hasbun H., Guillermo Conté L., Waldo Sepulveda L., María      Angélica Manríquez S., José Martínez M. Departamento de Obstetricia    y Ginecología, Hospital Clínico de la Universidad de Chile. Departamento    de Obstetricia y Ginecología, Clínica Las Condes. Laboratorio de Histopatología    CITOLAB. Premio "DR. JUAN WOOD WALTERS"    2006, al mejor trabajo de Ginecología: "Operación cono mediante      asa electroquirúrgica (LEEP) en el Hospital Regional de Copiapó. Análisis      del período 1994-1999, con seguimiento por 5 años hasta 2004", de    los Drs. Guillermo Borchert R, Paul Kusz R., Osear Valencia L., Evelyn      Borchert B., Andrés Kanacri L., Claudio Barría G., Hernán Aravena R, Raúl      Muranda A., Alicia Inostroza R, Ximena Flores A. Servicio de Ginecología    y Obstetricia, Hospital Regional de Copiapó. Mención Honrosa del premio "DR. JUAN    WOOD WALTERS" 2006 al trabajo: "Drástica disminución de beta      1 integrina caracteriza la transformación celular del epitelio mamario", del Dr. Ricardo Cornejo U. del Departamento de Ciencias Básicas,    Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de la Frontera, Temuco. Premio "DR. VÍCTOR MANUEL GAZITÚA    GUZMÁN" 2006 al mejor trabajo de Obstetricia al trabajo: "Características      del peso, edad gestacional y tipo de parto de recién nacidos en el sistema      público y privado", de los Drs. Jorge Cabrera D., Germán Cruz        B., Clemencia Cabrera F, Marjorie Cisternas C, Carmen Soto L, Katia Sepulveda        A., Sonia Sepulveda V., Hilda Teuber L., Heriberto Araneda C. Departamento    de Obstetricia y Ginecología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Concepción,    Servicio de Obstetricia y Ginecología Hospital Guillermo Grant Benavente,    Clínica Francesa, Concepción. Premio "DR. CARLOS MONCKEBERG BRAVO"    2006 al mejor trabajo de Perinatología: "Embarazo gemelar monoamniótico.      Experiencia de una serie de casos en el Hospital Padre Hurtado" de    los Drs. Masami Yamamoto C, Jorge Carrillo T., París Valentín Ch.,      Luis Alberto Caicedo R., Daniel Erazo C, Alvaro Insuma F. Unidad de    Gestión Clínica de la Mujer y Recién Nacido. Hospital Padre Hurtado, Universidad    de Desarrollo. Para dejar constancia firman:   Dr.ENRIQUE OYARZÚN        E.    Dr. PATRICIO GAYAN B.           Dr. LUIS MARTÍNEZ M.       Dr. EGHON GUZMAN B.   Secretario General     Presidente.       FIGO STATEMENT ON CAESAREAN SECTION At its meeting in January 2007, the FIGO    Executive Board approved, by a majority vote, the following statement    on Caesarean section. FIGO supports the view that childbearing,    for the great majority of women throughout the world, is a normal, physiological    process influenced by culture, traditions, religion and psychosocial factors.    FIGO further asserts that childbearing is a family event that requires    as a starting point a health-oriented rather than a disease-oriented model    of care from providers. The ability to offer delivery by Caesarean    section is essential for safe maternity care. In poor countries there    remains a substantial burden of maternal and fetal death due to a lack    of access to safe Caesarean delivery. Internationally, recommendations    on maternal and fetal indications for Caesarean delivery continue to evolve    in the light of research findings. However, some countries have experienced    increasing recourse to Caesarean delivery for non-medical indications.    FIGO considers surgical intervention without a medical rationale to fall    outside the bounds of best professional practice. Caesarean delivery should    be undertaken only when indicated to enhance the well-being of mothers    and babies and improve outcomes. FIGO respects women as active participants    in decisions that affect their health care. Making informed decisions    about the use or non-use of interventions such as Caesarean section requires    that women have up-to-date, complete and understandable information on    the risks and benefits of proposed interventions. FIGO calls upon individual obstetricians    to offer women evidence based delivery care within a framework of professional    practice. FIGO exhorts those responsible for public and private maternity    service provision to facilitate the best standards of professional practice    by enabling staff participation in continuing medical education, review    processes such as clinical audit, and outcomes research. Health systems    need fully to address the infrastructure requirements for safe operative    delivery including anaesthesia, prevention of hospital acquired infection    and safe blood transfusion. All professionals and health policy makers    share responsibility for comprehensive maternity service provision that    enables women to access appropriate care in a timely manner. Women should    not be denied access to Caesarean delivery when needed for want of funds    or infrastructure; neither should they be placed under pressure to have    a Caesarean birth because of a lack of professional care to support a    normal labour and delivery.     IS THIS CLINICAL TRIAL FULLY REGISTERED?:    A STATEMENT FROM THE INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF MEDICAL JOURNAL EDITORS Catherine De Angelis, MD, MPH; Jeffrey    M. Drazen, MD; Frank A. Frizelle, MBChB, MMedSc, FRACS; Charlotte Haug,    MD, PhD, MSc; John Hoey, MD; Richard Horton, FRCP; Sheldon Kotzin, MLS;    Christine Laine, MD, MPH; Ana Marusic, MD, PhD; A. John P.M. Overbeke,    MD, PhD; Torben V. Schroeder, MD, DMSc; Harold C. Sox, MD; and Martin    B. Van Der Weyden, MD. Catherine D. De Angelis, MD, MPH (Editor-in-Chief,    JAMA), Jeffrey M. Drazen, MD (Editor-in-Chief, New England Journal of    Medicine), Professor Frank A. Frizelle, BChB, MMedSc, FRACS (Editor, The    New Zealand Medical Journal), Charlotte Haug, MD, PhD, MSc (Editor-in-Chief,    Norwegian Medical Journal), John Hoey MD (Editor, CMAJ), Richard Horton,    FRCP (Editor, The Lancet), Sheldon Kotzin, MLS (Executive Editor, MEDLINE,    National Library of Medicine), Christine Laine, MD, MPH (Senior Deputy    Editor, Annals of Internal Medicine), Ana Marusic, MD, PhD (Editor, Croatian    Medical Journal), A. John P.M. Overbeke, MD, PhD (Executive Editor, Nederlands    Tijdschrift voor Geneeskunde, Dutch Journal of Medicine), Torben V. Schroeder,    MD, DMSc (Editor, Journal of the Danish Medical Association), Harold C.    Sox, MD (Editor, Annals of Internal Medicine), Martin B. Van Der Weyden,    MD (Editor, The Medical Journal of Australia). In September 2004, the members of the International    Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) published a joint editorial    aimed at promoting registration of all clinical trials (1). We stated    that we will consider a trial for publication only if it has been registered    before the enrollment of the first patient. This policy applies to trials    that start recruiting on or after July 1, 2005. Because many ongoing trials    were not registered at inception, we will consider for publication ongoing    trials that are registered before September 13, 2005. Our goal then and    now is to foster a comprehensive, publicly available database of clinical    trials. A complete registry of trials would be a fitting way to thank    the thousands of participants who have placed themselves at risk by volunteering    for clinical trials. They deserve to know that the information that accrues    from their altruism is part of the public record, where it is available    to guide decisions about patient care, and deserve to know that decisions    about their care rest on all of the evidence, not just the trials that    authors decided to report and that journal editors decided to publish. We are not alone in pursuing this goal.    The World Health Organization (WHO), through meetings in New York, Mexico    City, and Geneva, has brought us close to the goal of a single worldwide    standard for the information that trial authors must disclose. Around    the world, governments are beginning to legislate mandatory disclosure    of all trials. For example, among the bodies considering new legislation    is the U. S. Congress, where the proposed Fair Access to Clinical Trials    (FACT) Act would expand the current mandate for registration of clinical    trials. Many other journals have adopted our policy of requiring trial    registration. These initiatives show that trial registration has become    a public issue. But, as our deadline for registration approaches, trial    authors and sponsors want to be sure that they understand our requirements,    so that reports of their research will be eligible for editorial review.    The purpose of this joint and simultaneously published editorial is to    answer questions about the ICMJE initiative and to bring our position    into harmony with that of others who are working toward the same end. Our definition of a clinical trial remains    essentially the same as in our September 2004 editorial: "Any research    project that prospectively assigns human subjects to intervention and    comparison groups to study the cause-and-effect relationship between a    medical intervention and a health outcome." By "medical intervention"    we mean any intervention used to modify a health outcome. This definition    includes drugs, surgical procedures, devices, behavioral treatments, pro    cess-of-care changes, and the like. We update our 2004 editorial to state    that a trial must have at least one prospectively assigned concurrent    control or comparison group in order to trigger the requirement for registration. Among the trials that meet this definition,    which need to be registered? The ICMJE wants to ensure public access to    all "clinically directive" trials -trials that test a clinical    hypothesis about health outcomes (e.g., "Is drug X as effective as    drug Y in treating heart failure?"). We have excluded trials from    our registration requirement if their primary goal is to assess major    unknown toxicity or determine pharmacokinetics (phase 1 trials). In contrast,    we think the public deserves to know about trials that could shape the    body of evidence about clinical effectiveness or adverse effects. Therefore,    we require registration of all trials whose primary purpose is to affect    clinical practice (phase 3 trials). Between these two extremes are some    clinical trials whose prespecified goal is to investigate the biology    of disease or to provide preliminary data that may lead to larger, clinically    directive trials. We recognize that requiring public registration    of trials whose prespecified goal is to investigate the biology of disease    or to direct further research might slow the forces that drive innovation.    Therefore, each journal editor will decide on a case-by-case basis about    reviewing unregistered trials in this category. Authors whose trial is    unregistered will have to convince the editor that they had a sound rationale    when they decided not to register their trial. The ICMJE will maintain    this policy for the next two years. We will then review our experience. Our September 2004 editorial specified    the information that we would require for trial registration. Attendees    at a recent meeting of the WHO registration advisory group identified    a minimal registration data set of 20 items (Table 1).    The WHO-mandated items collectively address every key requirement that    we established in our September 2004 editorial. The ICMJE supports the    WHO minimal data set and has adopted it as the ICMJE's requirement: we    will consider a trial for publication if the authors register it at inception    by completing all 20 fields in the WHO minimal data set. As individual    editors, we will review the data in the registration fields when we decide    whether to consider the trial for publication. We will consider a registration    data set inadequate if it has missing fields or fields that contain uninformative    terminology. If an investigator has already registered a clinical trial    in a publicly owned, publicly accessible registry using the data fields    that we specified in our 2004 editorial, we will consider that registration    to be complete as long as each field contains useful information.    

Acceptable completion of data fields is    an important concern. It shouldn't be, but it is. Many entries in the    publicly accessible clinicaltrials.gov database do not provide meaningful information in some key data fields.    A search conducted on May 4, 2005 (Deborah Zarin, M.D., personal communication)    indicates that certain pharmaceutical-company entries list a meaningless    phrase (e.g., "investiga-tional drug") in place of the actual    name of the drug, even though a U.S. law requires trial registrants to    provide "intervention name" (www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/4856fnl.htm).    Many companies and other entities are completing the data fields    in a meaningful fashion. Data entries must include information that will    be of value to patients and health professionals; the intervention name    is needed if one is to search on that intervention. We recognize that clinical trial registries    have many uses, but whatever the use, a worldwide uniform standard for    a minimal database is necessary. We have participated in the WHO effort    to establish a clinically meaningful trial registration process. The ICMJE    supports this ongoing project. When it is complete we will evaluate the    process, and if it meets our primary objectives, we will adopt it. We stated our requirements for an acceptable    trial registry in the September 2004 editorial, and they remain the same.    The registry must be electronically searchable and accessible to the public    at no charge. It must be open to all registrants and not for profit. It    must have a mechanism to ensure the validity of the registration data. The purpose of a clinical trials registry    is to promote the public good by ensuring that everyone can find key information    about every clinical trial whose principal aim is to shape medical decision-making.    We will do what we can to help reach this goal. We urge all parties to    register new and ongoing clinical trials. If in doubt about whether a    trial is "clinically directive," register it. Don't use meaningless    phrases to describe key information. Every trial participant and every    investigator should be asking, "Is this clinical trial fully registered?"   REFERENCE 1. De Angelis C, Drazen JM, Frizelle FA,    Haug C, Hoey J, Horton R, et a!. Clinical trial registration: a    statement from the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors.    Ann Intern Med 2004; 141:477-8. Epub 2004 Sep 8. [PMID: 15355883]   This document is not covered by copyright    and may be copied or reprinted without permission (www.icmje.org). 

En Santiago de Chile, con fecha 28 de Junio    de 2007, a las 12:30 horas, se reúne la Comisión de Premios formada de    acuerdo a los artículos 26, 27 y 29 de los Estatutos de la Sociedad Chilena    de Obstetricia y Ginecología.

El Jurado constituido por el Presidente    de la Sociedad Dr. Eghon Guzman Bustamante, por los Miembros de la Comisión    Drs. Enrique Oyarzún E. y Patricio Gayan B., y por el Secretario General    Dr. Luis Martínez M., éste último con derecho a voz solamente; acuerda    otorgar los siguientes premios correspondientes al año 2006.

Premio "DR. JORGE DÍAZ BRAVO"    2006, al mejor trabajo de ingreso: "Cardiopatías congénitas con      diagnóstico prenatal: Seguimiento", de los Drs. Susana Aguilera        R, Juan Guillermo Rodríguez A., Gabriela Enríquez G., Ximena Vascope M.,        Osear Pizarro R., Ramón Almuna V. Centro de Referencia Perinatal Oriente,    Servicio de Obstetricia y Ginecología, Hospital Santiago Oriente, Centro    Cardiovascular, Hospital Luis Calvo Mackenna, Servicio de Neonatología    Hospital Santiago Oriente, "Dr Luis Tisné Brousse".

Mención Honrosa del Premio "DR. JORGE    DÍAZ BRAVO" 2006, al trabajo: "Tumores anexiales en niñas      y adolescentes: Experiencia del Hospital Clínico de la Universidad Católica      de Chile, 1991-2003", de los Drs. Carolina Schulin-Zeuthen        R, Prancisca de Jourdan H., Paulina Merino O., Alejandra Etchegaray A.,        Cristian Pomés C Adriana Castiblanco G., Mauricio Cuello F. Departamento    de Obstetricia y Ginecología, Facultad de Medicina, Pontificia Universidad    Católica de Chile.

Premio "DR. JUAN MALFANTI" 2006,    al mejor trabajo de casuística: "Síndrome antifosfolípidos y trombocitopenia      materna en gemelar bicoriónico con restricción fetal grave", de    los Drs. Jorge Hasbun H., Guillermo Conté L., Waldo Sepulveda L., María      Angélica Manríquez S., José Martínez M. Departamento de Obstetricia    y Ginecología, Hospital Clínico de la Universidad de Chile. Departamento    de Obstetricia y Ginecología, Clínica Las Condes. Laboratorio de Histopatología    CITOLAB.

Premio "DR. JUAN WOOD WALTERS"    2006, al mejor trabajo de Ginecología: "Operación cono mediante      asa electroquirúrgica (LEEP) en el Hospital Regional de Copiapó. Análisis      del período 1994-1999, con seguimiento por 5 años hasta 2004", de    los Drs. Guillermo Borchert R, Paul Kusz R., Osear Valencia L., Evelyn      Borchert B., Andrés Kanacri L., Claudio Barría G., Hernán Aravena R, Raúl      Muranda A., Alicia Inostroza R, Ximena Flores A. Servicio de Ginecología    y Obstetricia, Hospital Regional de Copiapó.

Mención Honrosa del premio "DR. JUAN    WOOD WALTERS" 2006 al trabajo: "Drástica disminución de beta      1 integrina caracteriza la transformación celular del epitelio mamario", del Dr. Ricardo Cornejo U. del Departamento de Ciencias Básicas,    Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de la Frontera, Temuco.

Premio "DR. VÍCTOR MANUEL GAZITÚA    GUZMÁN" 2006 al mejor trabajo de Obstetricia al trabajo: "Características      del peso, edad gestacional y tipo de parto de recién nacidos en el sistema      público y privado", de los Drs. Jorge Cabrera D., Germán Cruz        B., Clemencia Cabrera F, Marjorie Cisternas C, Carmen Soto L, Katia Sepulveda        A., Sonia Sepulveda V., Hilda Teuber L., Heriberto Araneda C. Departamento    de Obstetricia y Ginecología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Concepción,    Servicio de Obstetricia y Ginecología Hospital Guillermo Grant Benavente,    Clínica Francesa, Concepción.

Premio "DR. CARLOS MONCKEBERG BRAVO"    2006 al mejor trabajo de Perinatología: "Embarazo gemelar monoamniótico.      Experiencia de una serie de casos en el Hospital Padre Hurtado" de    los Drs. Masami Yamamoto C, Jorge Carrillo T., París Valentín Ch.,      Luis Alberto Caicedo R., Daniel Erazo C, Alvaro Insuma F. Unidad de    Gestión Clínica de la Mujer y Recién Nacido. Hospital Padre Hurtado, Universidad    de Desarrollo.

Para dejar constancia firman:

 

  FIGO STATEMENT ON CAESAREAN SECTION At its meeting in January 2007, the FIGO    Executive Board approved, by a majority vote, the following statement    on Caesarean section. FIGO supports the view that childbearing,    for the great majority of women throughout the world, is a normal, physiological    process influenced by culture, traditions, religion and psychosocial factors.    FIGO further asserts that childbearing is a family event that requires    as a starting point a health-oriented rather than a disease-oriented model    of care from providers. The ability to offer delivery by Caesarean    section is essential for safe maternity care. In poor countries there    remains a substantial burden of maternal and fetal death due to a lack    of access to safe Caesarean delivery. Internationally, recommendations    on maternal and fetal indications for Caesarean delivery continue to evolve    in the light of research findings. However, some countries have experienced    increasing recourse to Caesarean delivery for non-medical indications.    FIGO considers surgical intervention without a medical rationale to fall    outside the bounds of best professional practice. Caesarean delivery should    be undertaken only when indicated to enhance the well-being of mothers    and babies and improve outcomes. FIGO respects women as active participants    in decisions that affect their health care. Making informed decisions    about the use or non-use of interventions such as Caesarean section requires    that women have up-to-date, complete and understandable information on    the risks and benefits of proposed interventions. FIGO calls upon individual obstetricians    to offer women evidence based delivery care within a framework of professional    practice. FIGO exhorts those responsible for public and private maternity    service provision to facilitate the best standards of professional practice    by enabling staff participation in continuing medical education, review    processes such as clinical audit, and outcomes research. Health systems    need fully to address the infrastructure requirements for safe operative    delivery including anaesthesia, prevention of hospital acquired infection    and safe blood transfusion. All professionals and health policy makers    share responsibility for comprehensive maternity service provision that    enables women to access appropriate care in a timely manner. Women should    not be denied access to Caesarean delivery when needed for want of funds    or infrastructure; neither should they be placed under pressure to have    a Caesarean birth because of a lack of professional care to support a    normal labour and delivery.     IS THIS CLINICAL TRIAL FULLY REGISTERED?:    A STATEMENT FROM THE INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF MEDICAL JOURNAL EDITORS Catherine De Angelis, MD, MPH; Jeffrey    M. Drazen, MD; Frank A. Frizelle, MBChB, MMedSc, FRACS; Charlotte Haug,    MD, PhD, MSc; John Hoey, MD; Richard Horton, FRCP; Sheldon Kotzin, MLS;    Christine Laine, MD, MPH; Ana Marusic, MD, PhD; A. John P.M. Overbeke,    MD, PhD; Torben V. Schroeder, MD, DMSc; Harold C. Sox, MD; and Martin    B. Van Der Weyden, MD. Catherine D. De Angelis, MD, MPH (Editor-in-Chief,    JAMA), Jeffrey M. Drazen, MD (Editor-in-Chief, New England Journal of    Medicine), Professor Frank A. Frizelle, BChB, MMedSc, FRACS (Editor, The    New Zealand Medical Journal), Charlotte Haug, MD, PhD, MSc (Editor-in-Chief,    Norwegian Medical Journal), John Hoey MD (Editor, CMAJ), Richard Horton,    FRCP (Editor, The Lancet), Sheldon Kotzin, MLS (Executive Editor, MEDLINE,    National Library of Medicine), Christine Laine, MD, MPH (Senior Deputy    Editor, Annals of Internal Medicine), Ana Marusic, MD, PhD (Editor, Croatian    Medical Journal), A. John P.M. Overbeke, MD, PhD (Executive Editor, Nederlands    Tijdschrift voor Geneeskunde, Dutch Journal of Medicine), Torben V. Schroeder,    MD, DMSc (Editor, Journal of the Danish Medical Association), Harold C.    Sox, MD (Editor, Annals of Internal Medicine), Martin B. Van Der Weyden,    MD (Editor, The Medical Journal of Australia). In September 2004, the members of the International    Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) published a joint editorial    aimed at promoting registration of all clinical trials (1). We stated    that we will consider a trial for publication only if it has been registered    before the enrollment of the first patient. This policy applies to trials    that start recruiting on or after July 1, 2005. Because many ongoing trials    were not registered at inception, we will consider for publication ongoing    trials that are registered before September 13, 2005. Our goal then and    now is to foster a comprehensive, publicly available database of clinical    trials. A complete registry of trials would be a fitting way to thank    the thousands of participants who have placed themselves at risk by volunteering    for clinical trials. They deserve to know that the information that accrues    from their altruism is part of the public record, where it is available    to guide decisions about patient care, and deserve to know that decisions    about their care rest on all of the evidence, not just the trials that    authors decided to report and that journal editors decided to publish. We are not alone in pursuing this goal.    The World Health Organization (WHO), through meetings in New York, Mexico    City, and Geneva, has brought us close to the goal of a single worldwide    standard for the information that trial authors must disclose. Around    the world, governments are beginning to legislate mandatory disclosure    of all trials. For example, among the bodies considering new legislation    is the U. S. Congress, where the proposed Fair Access to Clinical Trials    (FACT) Act would expand the current mandate for registration of clinical    trials. Many other journals have adopted our policy of requiring trial    registration. These initiatives show that trial registration has become    a public issue. But, as our deadline for registration approaches, trial    authors and sponsors want to be sure that they understand our requirements,    so that reports of their research will be eligible for editorial review.    The purpose of this joint and simultaneously published editorial is to    answer questions about the ICMJE initiative and to bring our position    into harmony with that of others who are working toward the same end. Our definition of a clinical trial remains    essentially the same as in our September 2004 editorial: "Any research    project that prospectively assigns human subjects to intervention and    comparison groups to study the cause-and-effect relationship between a    medical intervention and a health outcome." By "medical intervention"    we mean any intervention used to modify a health outcome. This definition    includes drugs, surgical procedures, devices, behavioral treatments, pro    cess-of-care changes, and the like. We update our 2004 editorial to state    that a trial must have at least one prospectively assigned concurrent    control or comparison group in order to trigger the requirement for registration. Among the trials that meet this definition,    which need to be registered? The ICMJE wants to ensure public access to    all "clinically directive" trials -trials that test a clinical    hypothesis about health outcomes (e.g., "Is drug X as effective as    drug Y in treating heart failure?"). We have excluded trials from    our registration requirement if their primary goal is to assess major    unknown toxicity or determine pharmacokinetics (phase 1 trials). In contrast,    we think the public deserves to know about trials that could shape the    body of evidence about clinical effectiveness or adverse effects. Therefore,    we require registration of all trials whose primary purpose is to affect    clinical practice (phase 3 trials). Between these two extremes are some    clinical trials whose prespecified goal is to investigate the biology    of disease or to provide preliminary data that may lead to larger, clinically    directive trials. We recognize that requiring public registration    of trials whose prespecified goal is to investigate the biology of disease    or to direct further research might slow the forces that drive innovation.    Therefore, each journal editor will decide on a case-by-case basis about    reviewing unregistered trials in this category. Authors whose trial is    unregistered will have to convince the editor that they had a sound rationale    when they decided not to register their trial. The ICMJE will maintain    this policy for the next two years. We will then review our experience. Our September 2004 editorial specified    the information that we would require for trial registration. Attendees    at a recent meeting of the WHO registration advisory group identified    a minimal registration data set of 20 items (Table 1).    The WHO-mandated items collectively address every key requirement that    we established in our September 2004 editorial. The ICMJE supports the    WHO minimal data set and has adopted it as the ICMJE's requirement: we    will consider a trial for publication if the authors register it at inception    by completing all 20 fields in the WHO minimal data set. As individual    editors, we will review the data in the registration fields when we decide    whether to consider the trial for publication. We will consider a registration    data set inadequate if it has missing fields or fields that contain uninformative    terminology. If an investigator has already registered a clinical trial    in a publicly owned, publicly accessible registry using the data fields    that we specified in our 2004 editorial, we will consider that registration    to be complete as long as each field contains useful information.    

Acceptable completion of data fields is    an important concern. It shouldn't be, but it is. Many entries in the    publicly accessible clinicaltrials.gov database do not provide meaningful information in some key data fields.    A search conducted on May 4, 2005 (Deborah Zarin, M.D., personal communication)    indicates that certain pharmaceutical-company entries list a meaningless    phrase (e.g., "investiga-tional drug") in place of the actual    name of the drug, even though a U.S. law requires trial registrants to    provide "intervention name" (www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/4856fnl.htm).    Many companies and other entities are completing the data fields    in a meaningful fashion. Data entries must include information that will    be of value to patients and health professionals; the intervention name    is needed if one is to search on that intervention. We recognize that clinical trial registries    have many uses, but whatever the use, a worldwide uniform standard for    a minimal database is necessary. We have participated in the WHO effort    to establish a clinically meaningful trial registration process. The ICMJE    supports this ongoing project. When it is complete we will evaluate the    process, and if it meets our primary objectives, we will adopt it. We stated our requirements for an acceptable    trial registry in the September 2004 editorial, and they remain the same.    The registry must be electronically searchable and accessible to the public    at no charge. It must be open to all registrants and not for profit. It    must have a mechanism to ensure the validity of the registration data. The purpose of a clinical trials registry    is to promote the public good by ensuring that everyone can find key information    about every clinical trial whose principal aim is to shape medical decision-making.    We will do what we can to help reach this goal. We urge all parties to    register new and ongoing clinical trials. If in doubt about whether a    trial is "clinically directive," register it. Don't use meaningless    phrases to describe key information. Every trial participant and every    investigator should be asking, "Is this clinical trial fully registered?"   REFERENCE 1. De Angelis C, Drazen JM, Frizelle FA,    Haug C, Hoey J, Horton R, et a!. Clinical trial registration: a    statement from the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors.    Ann Intern Med 2004; 141:477-8. Epub 2004 Sep 8. [PMID: 15355883]   This document is not covered by copyright    and may be copied or reprinted without permission (www.icmje.org). 

FIGO STATEMENT ON CAESAREAN SECTION

At its meeting in January 2007, the FIGO    Executive Board approved, by a majority vote, the following statement    on Caesarean section.

FIGO supports the view that childbearing,    for the great majority of women throughout the world, is a normal, physiological    process influenced by culture, traditions, religion and psychosocial factors.    FIGO further asserts that childbearing is a family event that requires    as a starting point a health-oriented rather than a disease-oriented model    of care from providers.

The ability to offer delivery by Caesarean    section is essential for safe maternity care. In poor countries there    remains a substantial burden of maternal and fetal death due to a lack    of access to safe Caesarean delivery. Internationally, recommendations    on maternal and fetal indications for Caesarean delivery continue to evolve    in the light of research findings. However, some countries have experienced    increasing recourse to Caesarean delivery for non-medical indications.    FIGO considers surgical intervention without a medical rationale to fall    outside the bounds of best professional practice. Caesarean delivery should    be undertaken only when indicated to enhance the well-being of mothers    and babies and improve outcomes.

FIGO respects women as active participants    in decisions that affect their health care. Making informed decisions    about the use or non-use of interventions such as Caesarean section requires    that women have up-to-date, complete and understandable information on    the risks and benefits of proposed interventions.

FIGO calls upon individual obstetricians    to offer women evidence based delivery care within a framework of professional    practice. FIGO exhorts those responsible for public and private maternity    service provision to facilitate the best standards of professional practice    by enabling staff participation in continuing medical education, review    processes such as clinical audit, and outcomes research. Health systems    need fully to address the infrastructure requirements for safe operative    delivery including anaesthesia, prevention of hospital acquired infection    and safe blood transfusion.

All professionals and health policy makers    share responsibility for comprehensive maternity service provision that    enables women to access appropriate care in a timely manner. Women should    not be denied access to Caesarean delivery when needed for want of funds    or infrastructure; neither should they be placed under pressure to have    a Caesarean birth because of a lack of professional care to support a    normal labour and delivery.

 

  IS THIS CLINICAL TRIAL FULLY REGISTERED?:    A STATEMENT FROM THE INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF MEDICAL JOURNAL EDITORS Catherine De Angelis, MD, MPH; Jeffrey    M. Drazen, MD; Frank A. Frizelle, MBChB, MMedSc, FRACS; Charlotte Haug,    MD, PhD, MSc; John Hoey, MD; Richard Horton, FRCP; Sheldon Kotzin, MLS;    Christine Laine, MD, MPH; Ana Marusic, MD, PhD; A. John P.M. Overbeke,    MD, PhD; Torben V. Schroeder, MD, DMSc; Harold C. Sox, MD; and Martin    B. Van Der Weyden, MD. Catherine D. De Angelis, MD, MPH (Editor-in-Chief,    JAMA), Jeffrey M. Drazen, MD (Editor-in-Chief, New England Journal of    Medicine), Professor Frank A. Frizelle, BChB, MMedSc, FRACS (Editor, The    New Zealand Medical Journal), Charlotte Haug, MD, PhD, MSc (Editor-in-Chief,    Norwegian Medical Journal), John Hoey MD (Editor, CMAJ), Richard Horton,    FRCP (Editor, The Lancet), Sheldon Kotzin, MLS (Executive Editor, MEDLINE,    National Library of Medicine), Christine Laine, MD, MPH (Senior Deputy    Editor, Annals of Internal Medicine), Ana Marusic, MD, PhD (Editor, Croatian    Medical Journal), A. John P.M. Overbeke, MD, PhD (Executive Editor, Nederlands    Tijdschrift voor Geneeskunde, Dutch Journal of Medicine), Torben V. Schroeder,    MD, DMSc (Editor, Journal of the Danish Medical Association), Harold C.    Sox, MD (Editor, Annals of Internal Medicine), Martin B. Van Der Weyden,    MD (Editor, The Medical Journal of Australia). In September 2004, the members of the International    Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) published a joint editorial    aimed at promoting registration of all clinical trials (1). We stated    that we will consider a trial for publication only if it has been registered    before the enrollment of the first patient. This policy applies to trials    that start recruiting on or after July 1, 2005. Because many ongoing trials    were not registered at inception, we will consider for publication ongoing    trials that are registered before September 13, 2005. Our goal then and    now is to foster a comprehensive, publicly available database of clinical    trials. A complete registry of trials would be a fitting way to thank    the thousands of participants who have placed themselves at risk by volunteering    for clinical trials. They deserve to know that the information that accrues    from their altruism is part of the public record, where it is available    to guide decisions about patient care, and deserve to know that decisions    about their care rest on all of the evidence, not just the trials that    authors decided to report and that journal editors decided to publish. We are not alone in pursuing this goal.    The World Health Organization (WHO), through meetings in New York, Mexico    City, and Geneva, has brought us close to the goal of a single worldwide    standard for the information that trial authors must disclose. Around    the world, governments are beginning to legislate mandatory disclosure    of all trials. For example, among the bodies considering new legislation    is the U. S. Congress, where the proposed Fair Access to Clinical Trials    (FACT) Act would expand the current mandate for registration of clinical    trials. Many other journals have adopted our policy of requiring trial    registration. These initiatives show that trial registration has become    a public issue. But, as our deadline for registration approaches, trial    authors and sponsors want to be sure that they understand our requirements,    so that reports of their research will be eligible for editorial review.    The purpose of this joint and simultaneously published editorial is to    answer questions about the ICMJE initiative and to bring our position    into harmony with that of others who are working toward the same end. Our definition of a clinical trial remains    essentially the same as in our September 2004 editorial: "Any research    project that prospectively assigns human subjects to intervention and    comparison groups to study the cause-and-effect relationship between a    medical intervention and a health outcome." By "medical intervention"    we mean any intervention used to modify a health outcome. This definition    includes drugs, surgical procedures, devices, behavioral treatments, pro    cess-of-care changes, and the like. We update our 2004 editorial to state    that a trial must have at least one prospectively assigned concurrent    control or comparison group in order to trigger the requirement for registration. Among the trials that meet this definition,    which need to be registered? The ICMJE wants to ensure public access to    all "clinically directive" trials -trials that test a clinical    hypothesis about health outcomes (e.g., "Is drug X as effective as    drug Y in treating heart failure?"). We have excluded trials from    our registration requirement if their primary goal is to assess major    unknown toxicity or determine pharmacokinetics (phase 1 trials). In contrast,    we think the public deserves to know about trials that could shape the    body of evidence about clinical effectiveness or adverse effects. Therefore,    we require registration of all trials whose primary purpose is to affect    clinical practice (phase 3 trials). Between these two extremes are some    clinical trials whose prespecified goal is to investigate the biology    of disease or to provide preliminary data that may lead to larger, clinically    directive trials. We recognize that requiring public registration    of trials whose prespecified goal is to investigate the biology of disease    or to direct further research might slow the forces that drive innovation.    Therefore, each journal editor will decide on a case-by-case basis about    reviewing unregistered trials in this category. Authors whose trial is    unregistered will have to convince the editor that they had a sound rationale    when they decided not to register their trial. The ICMJE will maintain    this policy for the next two years. We will then review our experience. Our September 2004 editorial specified    the information that we would require for trial registration. Attendees    at a recent meeting of the WHO registration advisory group identified    a minimal registration data set of 20 items (Table 1).    The WHO-mandated items collectively address every key requirement that    we established in our September 2004 editorial. The ICMJE supports the    WHO minimal data set and has adopted it as the ICMJE's requirement: we    will consider a trial for publication if the authors register it at inception    by completing all 20 fields in the WHO minimal data set. As individual    editors, we will review the data in the registration fields when we decide    whether to consider the trial for publication. We will consider a registration    data set inadequate if it has missing fields or fields that contain uninformative    terminology. If an investigator has already registered a clinical trial    in a publicly owned, publicly accessible registry using the data fields    that we specified in our 2004 editorial, we will consider that registration    to be complete as long as each field contains useful information.    

Acceptable completion of data fields is    an important concern. It shouldn't be, but it is. Many entries in the    publicly accessible clinicaltrials.gov database do not provide meaningful information in some key data fields.    A search conducted on May 4, 2005 (Deborah Zarin, M.D., personal communication)    indicates that certain pharmaceutical-company entries list a meaningless    phrase (e.g., "investiga-tional drug") in place of the actual    name of the drug, even though a U.S. law requires trial registrants to    provide "intervention name" (www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/4856fnl.htm).    Many companies and other entities are completing the data fields    in a meaningful fashion. Data entries must include information that will    be of value to patients and health professionals; the intervention name    is needed if one is to search on that intervention. We recognize that clinical trial registries    have many uses, but whatever the use, a worldwide uniform standard for    a minimal database is necessary. We have participated in the WHO effort    to establish a clinically meaningful trial registration process. The ICMJE    supports this ongoing project. When it is complete we will evaluate the    process, and if it meets our primary objectives, we will adopt it. We stated our requirements for an acceptable    trial registry in the September 2004 editorial, and they remain the same.    The registry must be electronically searchable and accessible to the public    at no charge. It must be open to all registrants and not for profit. It    must have a mechanism to ensure the validity of the registration data. The purpose of a clinical trials registry    is to promote the public good by ensuring that everyone can find key information    about every clinical trial whose principal aim is to shape medical decision-making.    We will do what we can to help reach this goal. We urge all parties to    register new and ongoing clinical trials. If in doubt about whether a    trial is "clinically directive," register it. Don't use meaningless    phrases to describe key information. Every trial participant and every    investigator should be asking, "Is this clinical trial fully registered?"   REFERENCE 1. De Angelis C, Drazen JM, Frizelle FA,    Haug C, Hoey J, Horton R, et a!. Clinical trial registration: a    statement from the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors.    Ann Intern Med 2004; 141:477-8. Epub 2004 Sep 8. [PMID: 15355883]   This document is not covered by copyright    and may be copied or reprinted without permission (www.icmje.org). 

IS THIS CLINICAL TRIAL FULLY REGISTERED?:    A STATEMENT FROM THE INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF MEDICAL JOURNAL EDITORS

Catherine De Angelis, MD, MPH; Jeffrey    M. Drazen, MD; Frank A. Frizelle, MBChB, MMedSc, FRACS; Charlotte Haug,    MD, PhD, MSc; John Hoey, MD; Richard Horton, FRCP; Sheldon Kotzin, MLS;    Christine Laine, MD, MPH; Ana Marusic, MD, PhD; A. John P.M. Overbeke,    MD, PhD; Torben V. Schroeder, MD, DMSc; Harold C. Sox, MD; and Martin    B. Van Der Weyden, MD.

Catherine D. De Angelis, MD, MPH (Editor-in-Chief,    JAMA), Jeffrey M. Drazen, MD (Editor-in-Chief, New England Journal of    Medicine), Professor Frank A. Frizelle, BChB, MMedSc, FRACS (Editor, The    New Zealand Medical Journal), Charlotte Haug, MD, PhD, MSc (Editor-in-Chief,    Norwegian Medical Journal), John Hoey MD (Editor, CMAJ), Richard Horton,    FRCP (Editor, The Lancet), Sheldon Kotzin, MLS (Executive Editor, MEDLINE,    National Library of Medicine), Christine Laine, MD, MPH (Senior Deputy    Editor, Annals of Internal Medicine), Ana Marusic, MD, PhD (Editor, Croatian    Medical Journal), A. John P.M. Overbeke, MD, PhD (Executive Editor, Nederlands    Tijdschrift voor Geneeskunde, Dutch Journal of Medicine), Torben V. Schroeder,    MD, DMSc (Editor, Journal of the Danish Medical Association), Harold C.    Sox, MD (Editor, Annals of Internal Medicine), Martin B. Van Der Weyden,    MD (Editor, The Medical Journal of Australia).

In September 2004, the members of the International    Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) published a joint editorial    aimed at promoting registration of all clinical trials (1). We stated    that we will consider a trial for publication only if it has been registered    before the enrollment of the first patient. This policy applies to trials    that start recruiting on or after July 1, 2005. Because many ongoing trials    were not registered at inception, we will consider for publication ongoing    trials that are registered before September 13, 2005. Our goal then and    now is to foster a comprehensive, publicly available database of clinical    trials. A complete registry of trials would be a fitting way to thank    the thousands of participants who have placed themselves at risk by volunteering    for clinical trials. They deserve to know that the information that accrues    from their altruism is part of the public record, where it is available    to guide decisions about patient care, and deserve to know that decisions    about their care rest on all of the evidence, not just the trials that    authors decided to report and that journal editors decided to publish.

We are not alone in pursuing this goal.    The World Health Organization (WHO), through meetings in New York, Mexico    City, and Geneva, has brought us close to the goal of a single worldwide    standard for the information that trial authors must disclose. Around    the world, governments are beginning to legislate mandatory disclosure    of all trials. For example, among the bodies considering new legislation    is the U. S. Congress, where the proposed Fair Access to Clinical Trials    (FACT) Act would expand the current mandate for registration of clinical    trials. Many other journals have adopted our policy of requiring trial    registration. These initiatives show that trial registration has become    a public issue. But, as our deadline for registration approaches, trial    authors and sponsors want to be sure that they understand our requirements,    so that reports of their research will be eligible for editorial review.    The purpose of this joint and simultaneously published editorial is to    answer questions about the ICMJE initiative and to bring our position    into harmony with that of others who are working toward the same end.

Our definition of a clinical trial remains    essentially the same as in our September 2004 editorial: "Any research    project that prospectively assigns human subjects to intervention and    comparison groups to study the cause-and-effect relationship between a    medical intervention and a health outcome." By "medical intervention"    we mean any intervention used to modify a health outcome. This definition    includes drugs, surgical procedures, devices, behavioral treatments, pro    cess-of-care changes, and the like. We update our 2004 editorial to state    that a trial must have at least one prospectively assigned concurrent    control or comparison group in order to trigger the requirement for registration.

Among the trials that meet this definition,    which need to be registered? The ICMJE wants to ensure public access to    all "clinically directive" trials -trials that test a clinical    hypothesis about health outcomes (e.g., "Is drug X as effective as    drug Y in treating heart failure?"). We have excluded trials from    our registration requirement if their primary goal is to assess major    unknown toxicity or determine pharmacokinetics (phase 1 trials). In contrast,    we think the public deserves to know about trials that could shape the    body of evidence about clinical effectiveness or adverse effects. Therefore,    we require registration of all trials whose primary purpose is to affect    clinical practice (phase 3 trials). Between these two extremes are some    clinical trials whose prespecified goal is to investigate the biology    of disease or to provide preliminary data that may lead to larger, clinically    directive trials.

We recognize that requiring public registration    of trials whose prespecified goal is to investigate the biology of disease    or to direct further research might slow the forces that drive innovation.    Therefore, each journal editor will decide on a case-by-case basis about    reviewing unregistered trials in this category. Authors whose trial is    unregistered will have to convince the editor that they had a sound rationale    when they decided not to register their trial. The ICMJE will maintain    this policy for the next two years. We will then review our experience.

Our September 2004 editorial specified    the information that we would require for trial registration. Attendees    at a recent meeting of the WHO registration advisory group identified    a minimal registration data set of 20 items (Table 1).    The WHO-mandated items collectively address every key requirement that    we established in our September 2004 editorial. The ICMJE supports the    WHO minimal data set and has adopted it as the ICMJE's requirement: we    will consider a trial for publication if the authors register it at inception    by completing all 20 fields in the WHO minimal data set. As individual    editors, we will review the data in the registration fields when we decide    whether to consider the trial for publication. We will consider a registration    data set inadequate if it has missing fields or fields that contain uninformative    terminology. If an investigator has already registered a clinical trial    in a publicly owned, publicly accessible registry using the data fields    that we specified in our 2004 editorial, we will consider that registration    to be complete as long as each field contains useful information.

   

Acceptable completion of data fields is    an important concern. It shouldn't be, but it is. Many entries in the    publicly accessible clinicaltrials.gov database do not provide meaningful information in some key data fields.    A search conducted on May 4, 2005 (Deborah Zarin, M.D., personal communication)    indicates that certain pharmaceutical-company entries list a meaningless    phrase (e.g., "investiga-tional drug") in place of the actual    name of the drug, even though a U.S. law requires trial registrants to    provide "intervention name" (www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/4856fnl.htm).    Many companies and other

entities are completing the data fields    in a meaningful fashion. Data entries must include information that will    be of value to patients and health professionals; the intervention name    is needed if one is to search on that intervention.

We recognize that clinical trial registries    have many uses, but whatever the use, a worldwide uniform standard for    a minimal database is necessary. We have participated in the WHO effort    to establish a clinically meaningful trial registration process. The ICMJE    supports this ongoing project. When it is complete we will evaluate the    process, and if it meets our primary objectives, we will adopt it.

We stated our requirements for an acceptable    trial registry in the September 2004 editorial, and they remain the same.    The registry must be electronically searchable and accessible to the public    at no charge. It must be open to all registrants and not for profit. It    must have a mechanism to ensure the validity of the registration data.

The purpose of a clinical trials registry    is to promote the public good by ensuring that everyone can find key information    about every clinical trial whose principal aim is to shape medical decision-making.    We will do what we can to help reach this goal. We urge all parties to    register new and ongoing clinical trials. If in doubt about whether a    trial is "clinically directive," register it. Don't use meaningless    phrases to describe key information. Every trial participant and every    investigator should be asking, "Is this clinical trial fully registered?"

 

REFERENCE

1. De Angelis C, Drazen JM, Frizelle FA,    Haug C, Hoey J, Horton R, et a!. Clinical trial registration: a    statement from the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors.    Ann Intern Med 2004; 141:477-8. Epub 2004 Sep 8. [PMID: 15355883]

 

This document is not covered by copyright    and may be copied or reprinted without permission (www.icmje.org).